Welcome brothers and sisters. This month we are going to focus on the beautiful
Christian quality of endurance. As we watch these faith-strengthening
interviews and experiences, ask yourself, what is helping them to endure? And
how can I follow their example in my life? In each case, we will see the
importance of always relying on Jehovah. When I prayed for comfort to calm
my heart, I felt a peace come over me. This convinced me that Jehovah was
truly looking after my family. And if you're made is going through a hard time
spiritually, how can you help? We will consider a practical scriptural
principle and how we can apply it. This is the April program of JW Broadcasting.
We will start our program by visiting the South Africa branch. The work there
has increased tremendously in the past few years and the branch is now
expanding to support the growth. Globally, the good news is published in over
800 languages. Almost 300 of those languages are spoken in Africa. The South
Africa branch supports printing, purchasing, building design and audio
video production in the region. Literature is printed and packed for over 15,000
congregations in 20 countries. To keep up with this demand, printing and shipping
teams run two shifts per day. And in peak periods, the press works around the
clock. To help speed up work in the boundary and shipping departments, we have
automated and mechanized many work processes. Arrangements are underway to
install a second printing press but with all this increase storage spaces
become very limited. So the shipping department needs a larger warehouse. The
regional audio video center supports all languages in Africa with producing
audio and video items. They are currently busy with an extensive training
program. And soon, recording facilities will be set up in over 100 different
locations on this continent. The results are wonderful. Five years ago, none of
our videos were released in any of the languages of Africa. Now, 300 languages
have permission to produce audio and video publications. Recently, a branch
video team has been established to assist in providing video material for
JW.org and for JW Broadcasting. Due to this growing demand for audio and video
publications, new facilities are needed. In order to support these increases, the
branch is busy with a large expansion project. Doing so in an
ecologically sensitive residential area and without interrupting publication
production is challenging. The first part of the expansion project is a
five-story building with 48 new residence rooms. Now, this building is scheduled
to be completed by May of 2015. The major part of the expansion project is the
shipping warehouse. Now, this is a massive building. It's 210 meters long, 70
meters wide and 15 meters high. And perhaps just to put that into perspective, you
could park three Boeing 747s inside of this building.
Adjoining the warehouse is an administration building that will house the
regional audio video center. Included will be state-of-the-art recording studios
and editing facilities. When designing these buildings, attention was given to
making them environmentally friendly, energy efficient and also pleasant for the
brothers and sisters who will be working inside. The concrete structure of the
warehouse has been designed in such a way that in the future additional
suspended slabs for officers could be added if the use of the building ever
needs to change. This is what we call future-proofing a building. The branch
road system is also being upgraded to allow all of the literature to be
transported safely and efficiently between the countries and the new warehouse
building. Rainwater running from the roads, roofs and paving all of these new
buildings and areas is going to be directed into a large stormwater attenuation
pond and from there the water will slowly be discharged into a local stream.
Solar roof panels are being installed in various places around the branch to
harvest some of the beautiful sunshine that we have and added as electricity
into the Bethel power grid. The last phase of the project will be to upgrade the
printer in preparation for a second manned Roland printing press. A new
visitor's deck will be added and when you come on tour you'll be able to have
a bird's eye view of all of the action down at the process. The building
project has been contracted to several construction companies to speed up
the schedule. At the peak of construction, 700 contract workers will be on
site. We also have a large group of brothers and sisters from 21 different
countries to assist with project management, quality control, mechanical and
electrical installation and some of the finishes and builders trades. On weekends
volunteers from local congregations come into a system with site preparation
between the different phases. A good news reached Africa more than 100 years ago.
Since then, it has grown in many receptive hearts. Currently 3.5 million
Bible studies have been conducted in Africa. That is 30% of the global figure.
This certainly shows that Jehovah is drawing people from every nation, tribe and
tongue to bring in praise. Exciting developments indeed. We are happy to see
how the kingdom preaching work is speeding up all over the world. And you may
have noticed that we decided to use outside contractors to help with this
particular project. Although we generally use our own construction workers, it
can sometimes be beneficial to use contractors on a case-by-case basis. At
times, that can speed up a project and result in savings. For a few moments, I
would like to speak to you on the theme. We continually remember your endurance.
What is endurance? The original language word in the Greek scriptures has the
sense of standing one's ground and persevering, remaining steadfast under
trial. But it means even more than just toughing it out under a difficult
circumstance. The Christian who endures has genuine hope. He or she is convinced
that as 2 Corinthians chapter 4 and verse 17 puts it, the tribulation is
momentary and light compared with the reward which is everlasting. To illustrate
the importance of endurance, you see before me a number of suitcases. Some are
small, some are large. What we don't know is how heavy each one is. That depends
on what's inside. Some large suitcases can be surprisingly light. Some smaller
ones could be surprisingly heavy. In a sense, this illustrates what confronts each
one of us when we dedicate our life to Jehovah and start out on the race for life. At first,
we may not know what loads will have to carry. We may worry about what might seem to be
big tests only to find that they're not as overwhelming as we feared they would be.
On the other hand, some loads that we thought would be light, perhaps getting along with one
another in love, might be heavier to carry than we anticipated. Then there are unexpected
tests of our faith. Tests that could involve health problems, financial anxieties, family
issues and personal disappointments. All such situations call for endurance. The governing
body wants you dear brothers and sisters to know that we love you for your steadfast endurance.
Our feelings are well summarized by Paul's words at 1 Thessalonians chapter 1 verses 2 and 3.
There he wrote to the faithful Christians, we always thank God when we mention all of you in our
prayers, for we continually remember your faithful work, your loving labor, and your endurance
because of your hope in our Lord Jesus Christ in the presence of our God and Father.
How beautifully these words convey our feelings about you. We are greatly encouraged and strengthened
by your faithfulness, your integrity, and your endurance. No matter what type of hardship you
are facing, two things are certain. Jehovah knows how heavy your load is and he can give you the
strength to carry it. Think about that first statement. Jehovah knows how heavy your load is.
How do we know that? Open your Bible to Hebrews chapter 6 and verse 10.
Here the Apostle Paul, himself, a wonderful example of endurance, tells us what makes our steadfast
endurance worthwhile. Hebrews chapter 6 and verse 10 says,
for God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name
by ministering and continuing to minister to the holy ones. Imagine, Jehovah would consider it
unrighteous to take your endurance for granted. In fact, Jehovah does more than acknowledge your work.
He also helps you to carry your load. How do we know that? Open your Bible to Philippians chapter 4
verses 12 and 13 and notice here what the Apostle Paul, this model of endurance, tells us.
Now just before we read it, perhaps we may think of Paul as being a newcomer to the Christian faith
and compared to many others, he was. But by the time he wrote to the Philippians in 60 or 61 CE,
Paul had encountered many obstacles. He had many heavy loads to carry. Paul mentions a few of them
in these verses, but then in the second half of verse 12, notice what Paul writes
in everything and in all circumstances. I have learned the secret of both how to be full
and how to hunger, both how to have an abundance and how to do without.
Now, notice what he says in verse 13, for all things, I have the strength through the one who
gives me power. What does this mean for us? That whatever load we have to carry as a Christian,
we are not doing it with our own power. Jehovah will help us carry it. He will give us the
needed strength. Paul knew that because he had experienced this from Jehovah first hand,
he had Jehovah's help in his life. How? Well, consider what Paul faced on his first missionary
tour. An exciting assignment laid before Paul, Barnabas, and their traveling companions.
Would it be a light load full of only good experiences? Or would this assignment involve
challenges? Some perhaps heavier than he anticipated. Let's find out. One of Paul's first stops
was Pesidian Antioch. Here, Paul and his companions had great success. In fact, the people begged
them to come back on the next Sabbath to tell them more. That seems like a light load to carry,
doesn't it? But Paul's return visit did not go as smoothly as he probably expected.
While some accepted the good news, a poser stirred up the crowd to the extent that Paul and his
companions were thrown out of the city. Paul's next stop was Iconium, about a one hundred mile
or 160 kilometer trip from Antioch. Paul couldn't take a train, a bus, or a taxi. He had to travel on foot.
Did things go better for him when he got to Iconium? Would his preaching there be a lighter load to
carry than it was in Antioch? Well, some did accept his message, but then a poser stirred up
opposition before long Paul and his companions had to flee again. This time, they walked 20 miles,
or about 30 kilometers to Listera. At first, things went well there. After Paul and Barnabas were
mistaken for gods, they gave a skillful witness to the people of Listera about their powerful
creator. But then the imposers from Antioch and Iconium came after Paul. Some of them hated Paul so
much. They walked over one hundred miles or 160 kilometers to attack him. When they found him,
they stoned Paul and dragged him out of the city, leaving him for dead.
Did Paul think that this load was getting too heavy to carry? Did he cave into discouragement
because imposers hated him and even attacked him physically? No. Paul had endurance.
And a person who endures never gives up hope, even in the face of persecution. So what did Paul do?
He continued right on with preaching. This time in Derby, just imagine the effort. Paul had
to exert to walk the 60 miles or about 100 kilometers to Derby the day after he had almost been
stoned to death. However, the trip was worth the effort because while in Derby, Paul and his
companions made many disciples. As you can see, Paul had a heavy load to carry, but he didn't give up.
He continued preaching, but then Paul did something more. Open your Bible to Acts chapter 14.
Here we see something that proved Paul to be a man of endurance. At Acts chapter 14 and verse 21,
we read, after declaring the good news to that city and making quite a few disciples,
they returned to Listera, Iconium, and Antioch. Imagine Paul and his companions walked back
to the very cities where they had been viciously persecuted. Why? Verse 22 says,
There they strengthened the disciples, encouraging them to remain in the faith and saying,
we must enter into the kingdom of God through many tribulations. At first, that statement might seem
strange. How could Paul encourage the disciples by telling them that they would have many tribulations?
That prospect would seem depressing, not encouraging, but look carefully at Paul's words.
He didn't simply say, we must endure many tribulations. He said, we must enter into the
kingdom of God through many tribulations. In other words, Paul strengthened the disciples
by emphasizing the positive result of endurance. As Jesus said at Matthew chapter 10 verse 22,
the one who has endured to the end will be saved. What's the lesson for us?
Endurance is not just a matter of toughing it out under a difficult situation. Endurance means
keeping our hope bright in our mind. It means being personally convinced that as 2 Corinthians
chapter 4 and verse 17 says, the tribulation is momentary and light, but the reward is ever lasting.
Would you like to see how some of your brothers and sisters are displaying that kind of endurance?
We'd like to introduce you to brother Vasili Kalin, who was baptized for more than 50 years
and serves together with his wife Maria at the Russia branch. Has their load been easy to carry?
This is their story. I was born in Ukraine to a family of Jehovah's Witnesses. When I was five,
our whole family was exiled to Siberia. Traveling in the same train was a little girl who 17
years later would become my wife. That was Maria. We were married in 1968.
Under the Soviet Union, there was a ban on importing our publications. The congregations needed
more literature and we wanted to help the brothers. So Maria and I decided that we would start printing
the publications ourselves. I knew it would be risky because we had two young children.
Our son was then only five years old and our daughter was less than a year old. We risked losing
our freedom and even our children. But we trusted in Jehovah to support us and we didn't think too
hard about what could happen. If we have done that, we would just have given up.
My biggest problem was that I had no experience with photo development whatsoever.
So what did I do? I bought a reference book and some equipment.
The circuit of the year gave me the microfilm that was used for duplicating literature.
Then one evening we tried printing the literature for the first time. Of course it was a complete mess.
But in a little while we were able to start producing publications that were of good quality and
readable. Our work was highly confidential and we had to keep it a secret even from our family
who were all witnesses. Our work was done at night. We closed our curtains and turned off the lights.
We had a red lamp that gave us light while we were working.
When the literature was ready, we would deliver it in the morning to all the congregations.
It was also difficult and dangerous because if they caught us with literature,
there was no doubt we would be sent to prison. We needed to travel dozens of kilometers.
I am very grateful to Maria that she often helped me. A brother would drive up in his car and
I would pass on the literature to him. One time the brother was late. In Siberia it gets very cold.
And I remember that it was snowing so heavily that I turned into a snow woman you could say.
I couldn't go into a store to wear a mom because the brother could come any minute and we would miss
each other. So I had to wait.
When I would come back from work and Maria wasn't home, I would get very worried.
Anything could have happened. Maybe she had been arrested.
Sometimes our children knew that mama was a way to deliver in literature and they also got worried.
Everything I have gone through has taught me never to rely on myself but instead to completely trust
in Jehovah. We got a lot of joy out of the years we spent producing literature.
We knew that our brothers and sisters were being fed spiritually. We are grateful to Jehovah
that for 17 years we were able to print the publications.
1991 was a landmark year for Jehovah's Witnesses in the Soviet Union. We received official
recognition. What a victory that was. Unfortunately, the situation with Jehovah's Witnesses today
reminds me of the time we lived through. I see that Satan's methods have not changed but it is
really encouraging to remember that Jehovah also has not changed. He defended and protected his
people in the past and he will do the same today. Did you notice how happy brother and sister
Kalinar despite all the trials they've experienced? After all, what they went through was very serious.
It's just as James chapter 5 and verse 11 says, we consider happy those who have endured.
What examples of faith brother and sister Kalinar? But it's not just older ones who are
showing faithful endurance. Many of you younger ones are standing your ground against opposition.
For example, in South Korea, our brothers have been facing the neutrality issue since 1950.
Since that time, over 18,000 have been imprisoned for their faith. Right now,
607 of our brothers in South Korea are imprisoned for refusing to join the military.
Consider the Namkong family. This Christian family has three sons. The oldest has already finished
his prison sentence and been reunited with his family. The second son is currently in prison
and the youngest son will soon be required to take his stand. But in spite of these trials,
this family is enduring without wavering. Because their boys they like to run around and play,
we play soccer together. In the winter, we enjoy skiing or snowboarding.
From when they were young, we did our best to teach them basic morals from the Bible.
My parents always reminded me that although they were hardships, I could be proud of being
imprisoned because Jehovah highly values my stand for integrity. Knowing this gave me great comfort
and encouragement. I stood in court twice. I was so nervous. I didn't know what to say.
So I prayed and prayed. And sure enough, just as the scriptures promised, I was able to recall
all the words I needed to say and gave a bold witness before the judge.
After the sentencing, my heart ached so much. My son had committed no crime but he had to live
in a bad environment. Do her labor not be able to freely see those he loves. These thoughts kept
going through my mind. It was unbearable. My brother wasn't where he would always be.
I remember being really sad. I kept thinking, my son did nothing wrong. Why does he have to go
through this? My heart hurts so much and there was no end to my tears.
I felt I needed to be strong for her. I never prayed so much for my wife as I did then.
I prayed for Jehovah's help and for him to help my children maintain their integrity
despite whatever hardship they faced. And when I prayed for comfort to calm my heart,
I felt a peace come over me. This convinced me that Jehovah was truly looking after my family.
Also, when the brothers mentioned those maintaining neutrality and their closing prayers,
it really gave me great strength.
As soon as I arrived in prison, I prayed to Jehovah to let me meet our brothers.
Soon after, I saw a brother about my age walk through the prison door.
I was amazed that Jehovah took notice of even such minor issues
and how quickly he answered my prayers. This helped me realize how much he really cares for me
and knowing this, helped me confront the challenges that lie ahead.
I still remember a comment that a brother made during one of our meetings in prison.
He talked about the means that Jehovah uses to provide help, that he speaks to us
through our well-prepared comments and encouraging talks.
Our middle son is in prison now. When I go to visit my son in prison,
he tells me that he is encouraging the other brothers, conducting meetings,
and feeling his spirituality is getting stronger.
I was young and the taunting words of the non-witnesses terrified me,
not being able to see and have physical contact with my loved ones for over a year
was the hardest part to endure. Despite difficult conditions,
the brothers are doing their best to exalt Jehovah. We know that he is pleased with us
and watches over all the brothers who are maintaining their Christian neutrality.
My sons have loyally maintained their integrity to Jehovah and they continue to set a good example.
That fact gives me great joy and happiness deep in my heart.
Instead of viewing this as a trial, we see this as a way of demonstrating our faith to Jehovah.
I am convinced now that when we put spiritual things first in our lives,
Jehovah will help us maintain our faith.
Looking back on the experiences and trials that I face serving in prison for neutrality,
I feel more confident that I can overcome any difficulties that may lie ahead.
I often receive letters from brothers and sisters around the world.
They often write, the entire congregation and I, along with our Christian family around the
world, are praying for you brothers in Korea to keep your integrity. I am very grateful for their
prayers and interests and thank our loving father Jehovah for his constant care.
Isn't it beautiful to see such a close, spiritually strong family?
Truly, they are enduring this painful situation with Jehovah's help.
But maybe your endurance is related to something else.
Open your Bible to 2 Corinthians chapter 12, which reveals another heavy load that the
Apostle Paul had to carry. Beginning with verse 7, Paul writes,
"...to keep me from becoming overly exalted, I was given a thorn in the flesh, an angel of Satan to
keep slapping me so that I might not be overly exalted. Three times, I begged the Lord about this,
that it would depart from me, but he said to me, my undeserved kindness is sufficient for you,
for my power is being made perfect in weakness. What was Paul's thorn in the flesh?
We don't know for sure, but it may well have been a physical affliction, such as a problem with
Paul's eyesight. Many of you dear brothers and sisters are enduring chronic health problems.
Perhaps you have been doing so for many years, like Paul, you may have prayed repeatedly that
your thorn be removed. Never think that Jehovah is ignoring your prayers, or that he doesn't care
about your situation. On the contrary, it may be that the answer to your prayer is the same one
that Paul received. In effect, Jehovah could be saying, my power is being made perfect in weakness.
In other words, the fact that you are enduring is proof that Jehovah's power is supporting you
every day. Let's meet someone who illustrates that very point. Brother John Foster has served as a
member of the United States Bethel family for more than 50 years, but one day something unexpected
happened that changed his life. I was baptized in 1958 in January the 11th at a high school in Detroit.
The ministry was very important to me because I've met the lives of individuals and so I
considered it a priority to go out into the ministry. I applied for Bethel in 1962 at a district
convention and I arrived there on my birthday in December of 28, 1962. I came to Bethel and I was
determined to use my strength the best way possible and so I worked very hard to produce the
publications because I realized that it made lives of individuals. It was a very good time for me
because I could give a mile to Jehovah at a young age when I was strong and could carry out more.
In 2006 everything changed. That was in a Jehovah car accident. We were on our way to the congregation
and we hit a tree. I got a broken neck and a broken leg and unfortunately the driver did not survive.
The others that were in the car didn't receive injuries as severe. I was in the coma for three weeks.
When I woke up I dealt with the pain of my recovery by witnessing people. I wanted to place literature
with the people in the hospital and almost seemed like an unworked feel. I placed a Bible
teachbook with my surgeon and I told him that you saved my life so I want to save your life.
If I was concerned after the accident whether Bethel would be able to use me in a meaningful way
and not simply tolerate me, the responsibilities that I have now are to work with the books
that have been printed from all over the world and we put them in archives as examples of the
printing that have been done. Another job that I have once in a while is to talk to departments
and give them encouraging talks. I assume that I would heal and be better than I am now.
I have been able to return to what I used to do but I was wrong in that.
I feel that I'm doing the best I can so I feel comfortable. I wish I could do more but
I just don't have the ability to do more and so I met peace with Jehovah. I think he
understood. I know that he understands my situation and I'm doing the very best I can
and that any real improvement is going to come from life in a new system of things.
So that's where my hope is that I'll make it to the new system of things and that I'll
yet see and prove to our perfect God really. Brother Foster is a beautiful example for us.
Although he is limited by his circumstances, he is not giving up. It is obvious that Jehovah is
helping him to faithfully endure. Another test of faith that Paul had to endure is identified
at Romans 9 verses 2 to 4. Their Paul wrote, I have great grief and unceasing pain in my heart.
For I could wish that I myself were separated from the Christ as the cursed one for the sake of my
brothers, my relatives according to the flesh who are Israelites. It hurt Paul that
members of his own nation oppose the kingdom message and even persecuted those who proclaimed it.
Many of you brothers and sisters endure something similar when members of your own family
oppose your Christian course. Of course, this is to be expected because Jesus stated at Matthew
chapter 10 and verse 36, a man's enemies will be those of his own household.
The governing body commends you brothers and sisters who serve Jehovah despite opposition
from members of your own family. To help you endure, we would like you to meet sister Priscilla
Lagno from the United States. Her experience highlights what can result when we endure family
opposition. Paul and I were high school sweethearts and after two years of college we got married.
We started a family, we had three beautiful children, we were very involved in our church and we
were very happy. Even so, I was searching. I remembered the scripture to Ephesians 4.5 that says
there's only one true faith and so I wanted that. I wanted one true faith and so I prayed for God
to help me. So that's when Jehovah's Witnesses knocked at my door and offered me a Bible study.
I really loved what I was learning. I started going to the meetings at the kingdom hall.
I started making changes and those changes were good for my family but it wasn't making my husband
very happy. He blamed me or my religion for any problem that came up. He even threatened that he
would divorce me. Some of the things that Paul did to keep me from going to meetings or to slow me
down was to hide my literature. He even took parts out of the car so I couldn't use the car to go.
But one of the lowest points was when he would not let me take the children to the meetings with me.
It bothered me because I felt it was my responsibility to make sure the children learned about
Jehovah. So one memorial I took the children to the kingdom hall with me. Paul wasn't home
to take care of them. That's why. And when we came out of the meeting there was a note on the car
that said don't bother coming home. So we were able to go to a family member's house to spend the night.
The next morning we got up and he said we could come home. So I told the kids to give him a hug.
We brought him a nice treat. And I remember praying with him. And I just did not want them
to feel that their dad was a bad man. I wanted them to love their dad.
At this point I really was convinced I had found the true religion or that one faith that I
had read about in the Bible. So what I did is I studied secretly with the children. I didn't want
to make Paul upset. And as a result they were well behaved. They were happy. And Paul could see
that. And eventually he allowed them to come to the meetings. So one day a Bethel couple invited
Paul to tour Patterson. And because he was in construction work he was an engineer. He was very
interested and very impressed with the work. So he agreed to go. And little by little he realized
that the witnesses, the Bethelites were just ordinary people. Then there was a big change
that showed me that Jehovah had really been helping me all along. And I'm happy to say Paul can
tell you about it. Well yes, as Prasol said I'm an engineer and one day on one of our big jobs
we had a leak. I went to Jehovah in prayer and I made a bargain with him. And if he would help
find this leak I would go to one meeting with Prasola. Mind you she knew nothing about this prayer.
Well the very next day we found that leak. So that next Sunday out of the blue I told Prasola that
I was going to be going to a meeting with her. Well eventually started to go into meetings were
regularly. I started my own Bible study and in about a year later I got baptized. I realized over
the years I was missing out on that happiness that both Prasola and the children had. So through
Prasola's kindness and submissive matter to me I started changing my view.
Well Paul's retired now and we're still together and we're able to pioneer together which is
a real blessing. The children are all in full-time service and I just always remember that if you
trust in Jehovah rely on him he'll always help you endure. And I'm so thankful that Prasola
stuck it out with me and now we have a spiritual family that I would never never want to give up.
What a powerful lesson we can learn from Sister Lagno. Although 10 years went by before her husband
joined her in the truth she trusted in Jehovah. We must never lose hope that even opposing family
members may one day accept the truth. But sometimes we need to display endurance even if everyone
in the family is in the truth. In this portrayal we will see how applying one specific Bible principle
can do a lot to help a marriage mate who is going through a hard time.
As a family we have always served Jehovah together but something was changing in my husband.
He said he was just burned out but he started to miss all of the meetings. I couldn't believe I was
doing this by myself. The elders stopped by to encourage him but he didn't change. He stopped
taking the lead spiritually. I was getting more and more upset. I tried to remind him of his
responsibilities as a spiritual head and what he should be doing but the more I said the worst
things got and it drove him further away. I didn't know what to do. I was only seeing my own
struggles. I didn't see his. After the meeting the elders encouraged me. They shared with me
first Peter 3-1 which says if any or not obedient to the word they may be one without a word
through the conduct of their wives. I could see there was another way to handle this situation.
My attitude and actions can have a strong effect on my husband and showing empathy and compassion
goes a long way. Even more than words. I thought about the Bible example of Abigail.
Her husband, Nebel, was a worthless man. But Abigail was so patient. My husband was
no Nebel. My husband was nothing like that. That night we had a good talk. I allowed him to express
his feelings and I just listened. He was under more pressure than I realized. I told him not to feel
any pressure from me and to come back when he's ready. I assured him that the kids and I love him
very much. That assurance went a long way. Everyone was feeling better. Though it took some time
things started changing for the better. My attitude and support went so much farther than any words
ever could. When we apply Bible principles we don't always know what blessings may come about.
I am forever thankful for Jehovah's guidance. Regardless of the outcome
we are sure to have Jehovah's approval when we work hard to apply Bible principles.
Expanding our ministry also requires endurance. We may need to learn a new language,
a new culture, and adapt to very different living conditions. Consider the example of
Denton and Janet Hopkinson. Brother Hopkinson currently serves as a member of the Philippine's
Branch Committee. He was baptized in 1943 and has served in the Philippines for more than 60 years
and Sister Hopkinson for more than 50 years. What challenges have they faced and what has
helped them to endure? Let's find out. My mother learned the truth from a neighbor. I was 10 years old
when I was baptized but then I became a pioneer when I was 16 years of age. My father and I were
baptized at the same circuit assembly in October of 1950 and at that time I was 11 years old. I set
a date after I finished high school to go into my pioneering and that's what I did. Later on of
course I got an application to attend the 35th class of Gilead and I was still 20 at the time.
After I had been pioneering for about three years I was called up for compulsory military service.
Of course I refused to accept that but the judge sentenced me to six months in prison.
And while I was in prison the application for Gilead was approved and the invitation came.
Gilead was a wonderful experience and when we arrived in the Philippines we did not expect ever
to return to our home country. Coming to the Philippines as a first port of call. That's the first
time that I met Denton but my partner and I were going to Thailand. A arriving in Thailand was
quite a change coming from a cold country. It was hot so that was a challenge to get used to.
Brother Leech my partner and I we didn't learn much of the language in the first few months.
Although I did try to learn by comparing the Let God be true book in English with the Let God be
true book in Tagalog but that wasn't so easy because the grammar is so much different to English.
After six months in the Philippines and we found a pile of letters on our desk in our room and
that was our assignment to go into the circuit work. This was really a challenge for me is something
new. I was only 22 years old at that time. I remember one time I went to a congregation and they
showed me my room. It was just a plain room. It was a new house just newly built but it was just a
wooden floor and four walls and that was it. In the corner a banik sleeping mat. In some cases
there was a toilet outside the house mostly outside the house but in some cases there was no toilet
at all so you just had to find your own way into the nearby countryside. After about two and a
half years in the circuit work then I received the letter assigning me a district overseer and then
oftentimes we have to travel by bus in some remote areas. I remember one time in Masbati the road
was so rough and it was long it was much more difficult than it was in the circuit work. I had no
vehicle to travel in. It was mostly public transportation. I've never owned a car in my life.
He was while I was serving in the district work that I received the letter telling me to come to
Bethel. When I came to Bethel brother Stuart the branch servant told me that I was to look after his
work while he was away traveling to visit various countries in the zone work and I was really
felt completely unprepared and unqualified for that kind of work at that time.
After I was in Thailand for four years then and I had decided to get married and brother
nor had agreed that I would be the one to be reassigned to the Philippines and we were married in
1965. I have found that whatever assignment you're given in Jehovah's organization although it
seems intimidating it seems to be difficult at the start but if you accept it and trust in Jehovah
don't approach it as if you know everything or you can do it yourself but really trust in Jehovah
to help you then you can succeed. The Jehovah's help we can all have the privileges of serving him
and can all get the help of the Holy Spirit to continue to serve him faithfully.
Sometimes brothers ask me how I was able to endure that long for 60 years in missionary service
but I believe it is being willing to endure problems with the hope that things will improve as
time goes by and Jehovah himself will give us a strength. How rewarding it is to spend a lifetime
in Jehovah's service. On the video on demand section of JW Broadcasting you'll find another
fine record of endurance. It's a fascinating video about the Stratton Ohio legal case that went
all the way to the Supreme Court of the United States. The case came about after the village of Stratton
required that Jehovah's witnesses obtain a permit before going from door to door. You will learn
more about this case and hear actual recordings from the Supreme Court hearing.
At one time or another we all have to endure the imperfections of our brothers and sisters.
In this morning worship brother David Schaefer guides us to the principles that will help us to do so.
Please open your Bibles to Philippians chapter four. If you are using an electronic device I
invite you to do this by means of the JW Library app. Sometimes in our public ministry we have
an opportunity to show people the difference between the King James version and the new world
translation. If you tap the six on your iPad at Philippians four six you'll notice that the King James
renders this verse be careful for nothing which sounds like an exhortation to worry needlessly
exactly the opposite of what Philippians four six and seven is encouraging us to do. Namely do
not be anxious over anything but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving
let your petitions be made known to God and the peace of God that surpasses all understanding
will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus. Now I invite you to use
the bookmark feature of your JW Library as we'll return here but now regarding the comments in our
text today that have to do with stumbling how is it what are some sorts of understanding that
are surpassed by the peace of God. Sometimes when a person is mistreated he thinks and rightly so
that this sort of thing ought not to happen in Jehovah's organization. How might the peace of God
surpass that understanding? One way is that Jehovah reminds us through his word that sometimes
things happen in Jehovah's organization that ought not to happen. Turn please to 1 Samuel chapter 24
and verse two. Here young David was enduring persecution from Saul who had lost Jehovah's favor
and who was jealous of David. Notice what happens here in verse two for Samuel 24 too. So Saul
took 3,000 men chosen from all Israel and went to look for David and his men on the rocky cliffs
of the mountain goats. Imagine that the king of Israel using Israel's army which was supported by
dedicated funds to go after a personal enemy, an enemy of his who actually had Jehovah's favor.
That was wrong on so many levels and it continued for years but the point is what was David's response
to that? Was he bitter? Did he say you know there's no use even trying under circumstances like
this? Well, no. On the contrary, he remained respectful of Saul's position as God's anointed one,
refusing to attack even when he had many opportunities to do so. In fact, notice his actions in verse
eight. Then David got up and went out from the cave and called out after Saul, my Lord the King,
when Saul looked behind him, David bowed down low with his face to the ground and prostrated himself.
David refused to allow bitterness to poison his heart or to compromise his integrity.
But today we're living in a time when Jehovah's people as a whole can never be corrupted.
So how is it that this brother who disappointed me can maintain a good standing? That is a form
of understanding. How does the peace of God surpass that understanding? Well, one way
is that it brings back to our minds that the Christian Greek scriptures are full of counsel
directed to us to help us put up with those who have given us a legitimate cause for complaint.
So we shouldn't be surprised if occasionally one of our brothers or sisters is lacking in some
Christian quality. Is it possible that applying the words of Philippians chapter four in verse eight
will help us? A lot has to do with the way we direct our thoughts. If you have enabled your
electronic bookmark, you can just tap it and go back to Philippians chapter four. And while you're
tapping, tap the eight for the kingdom interlinear rendering, the main text of Philippians for eight
reads, finally, brothers, whatever things are true, whatever things are of serious concern,
whatever things are righteous, whatever things are chased, whatever things are lovable,
continue considering these things. But notice that the kingdom interlinear instead of lovable
uses the expression affection inducing. Jehovah wants us to consider what is good in people.
To focus on that which induces our affection for them rather than our resentment and the article
finding the key to brotherly affection in the October 15, 1993 issue of the watchtower,
the watchtower boiled the whole process down to one word appreciation. Appreciation is the key
to brotherly affection. Yes, I'm hurt. However, is there something? Anything that I, that God or
others sees in this brother and appreciates? Can I see it? Is he seeking first the kingdom?
He didn't have to make himself available to Jehovah to serve here at Bethel, but he has.
Is he putting up a good fight against our three common enemies, Satan the devil, the flesh,
the world? Despite where he has come from in life and what he is presently going through,
is he not really doing his best? Continue considering the affection inducing things.
Moreover, notice what it says right here in Philippians chapter 4 and verse 13.
For all things, I have the strength through the one who gives me power. Oh, true, when an offense is
a major sin, it's understandable that we would take steps to initiate the appropriate congregation
action, but we should always remember that Jehovah gives us the strength we need to serve him
even under difficult circumstances. There's never a reason to stop serving Jehovah. We should always
be ready to ask Jehovah for his help, particularly if it seems that something is going to interfere
with our feelings for him and our stand for his kingdom. Always ready to ask Jehovah for help.
Indeed, we should be careful for nothing, not in the sense of worrying needlessly,
but in the sense of our days text that we keep on asking Jehovah, not being anxious over anything,
but letting our petitions be made known to God with the confidence that he will supply us the
strength that we need to remain firm and do his will. In Bible times and today, many have
encouraged themselves to endure by singing spiritual songs. You may recall that when Paul and
Silas were in prison, Acts 1625 says they were praying and praising God with song. We know they must
have sung out with their whole hearts because the verse goes on to say that the prisoners were
listening to them. Yes, even in the darkest moments, singing spiritual songs can lift our spirits.
That's why I'm convinced that you will enjoy this music video that in a few words summarizes the
message of this month's program. The song is called Never Give Up.
The words that were said by your son, if they persecuted me, then they'll do it to you.
It's not a surprise, really nothing that's new. Jehovah, I pray, please let me be strong.
My life and devotion to you, they belong. My record of faith will never be lost.
I'll be loyal to you no matter the call. I'll never give in to talk or to
breath enduring in vain. The sufferings fail, I fail. Brothers and sisters,
please remember that no matter what situation you may be enduring,
Jehovah will never abandon you. He will always be there to strengthen and sustain you.
Never forget what Jehovah promises at Isaiah chapter 41 and verse 10. Do not be afraid for I am with
you. Do not be anxious for I am your God. I will fortify you. Yes, I will help you. I will
really hold on to you with my right hand of righteousness.
We hope that this program has assured all of you that the governing body truly loves each
one of you and that we notice and appreciate your steadfast endurance. To conclude,
we would like to take you to a remote part of Southern Chile. We have greetings from the 23
publishers that live in the town of Cochran. Seven of them are pioneers. The local congregation
has two elders and three ministerial servants taking the lead. A number of the publishers regularly
overcome great distances and other obstacles to attend the meetings. One family travels for an
hour by boat, followed by over two hours in a four by four vehicle. And when there is too much
snow for them to drive, they arrive on horseback. We thank you for joining us this month.
This is JW Broadcasting from Brooklyn, New York.